		 Vis5D Porting and Development Notes

This file attempts to give a *brief* overview of how the autoconf
build system works, for the aid of porters and developers.  It centers
around the GNU autoconf, autoheader, automake, and libtool development
tools, and for more information you should see the GNU documentation,
which can be found online (among other places) at:

	http://www.gnu.org/manual/manual.html

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If Vis5D doesn't build on your machine, what you want to do is:

1) Figure out what you need to do to build it, e.g. replace some
function call or link to a particular library.  If there are problems
during the configure run, look in the file config.log for diagnostic
output.

2) Write an autoconf test in configure.in (see below) that tests for
the problem.

3) Modify the code or the Makefile.am (see below) to alter its
behaviour based upon the result of the test in step (2).

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There are essentially three human-edited files which control the build
process:

configure.in: specifies what tests to run in the configure script
acconfig.h: specifies outputs of configure.in that can't be guessed
	    by autoheader
Makefile.am: a high-level type of Makefile for input to automake;
	     there's one of these in each subdirectory too

(Oh, there's also an acinclude.m4 file that contains some extra macros
for configure.in that I gathered from external sources.)

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
When an ordinary user builds Vis5D, what happens is that the configure
script generates two things:

a) config.h from config.h.in

config.h contains #define statements indicating results of most of the
configure tests, e.g. #define HAVE_LIBNETCDF 1 if the netcdf library
was found.  It is included by all of the .c files and used to tailor
their behavior to the machine in question.  (config.h.in was generated
by autoheader, as described below.)

b) Makefile(s) from Makefile.in(s) in each directory

A Makefile, of course, is just the ordinary thing that 'make' uses.
Makefile.in is a template, into which the configure script substitutes
things like the C compiler name and the linker flags.  (The Makefile.in
file, in turn, was generated from Makefile.am by automake; see below.)

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To build everything from scratch, assuming you have up-to-date
versions of automake, libtool, autoconf, and autoheader (all of which
can be gotten from the GNU web site; autoheader comes with autoconf),
you run the included script:

	% ./autogen.sh

Once you've got things built for the first time, though, the Makefiles
know enough to rebuild the various things when necessary (usually).

Unfortunately, there is a bug in automake-1.4 (which will be fixed in
the next release) that causes a problem in the generated Makefile.in
(and thus the Makefile).  To fix the problem by hand, replace
occurrences of "$$/" in the top-level Makefile.in with "$$d/".

Below, we'll go into some of the individual commands that are run by
autogen.sh in more detail, so you have some idea of what is happening.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1)
	% aclocal

This is a command that is part of automake, which you shouldn't have
to run often.  It fetches necessary macros from various sources and
uses them to create aclocal.m4; one of the places it fetches macros
from is acinclude.m4, so you'll need to re-run aclocal if acinclude.m4
is changed.

2)
	% autoheader

Scans configure.in and aclocal.m4 to see what tests are performed, and
uses them to regenerate config.h.in.  config.h.in basically contains
default settings for the various preprocessor symbols that will
eventually be used in config.h.  Rerun this when configure.in,
aclocal.m4, or acconfig.h change.

3)
	% automake

automake generates Makefile.in files from Makefile.am files (note that
it automatically goes into subdirectories as necessary).  Makefile.am
files are a sort of very high-level Makefile that doesn't look very
much like an ordinary Makefile.  It specifies the programs and
libraries to be built, and automake automatically generates things
like:

 * sets up all the templates where the configure script can
   substitute its build information (e.g. C compiler flags)
 * install and uninstall targets
 * handles shared libraries (which are otherwise nigh-impossible
   to do portably)

You'll need to re-run automake when the Makefile.am files change

4)
	% autoconf

Generates the configure script from configure.in and aclocal.m4.  As
mentioned above, the configure.in file specifies tests to be performed
to determine system features, using a mixture of the m4 macro language
and the Bourne Shell (sh) script.  autoconf supplies a large number of
predefined macros to help you test for features; e.g. AC_PROG_CC is a
macro to find out the name of the C compiler.  Rerun this when
configure.in or aclocal.m4 change.

The general philosophy of autoconf is to actively go out and look for
a feature, instead of trying to infer it from other information.  For
example, if you want to know whether your system has the setrlimit()
function, it doesn't look at the system name and then go to a table of
systems and features.  Instead, it directly tries to link a C program
calling setrlimit and sees if it succeeds.  You specify this in
configure.in by calling the following macro: AC_CHECK_FUNCS(setrlimit)
(This will #define HAVE_SETRLIMIT in config.h if it is successful,
which we can then use to decide in our program if we want to call that
function.)

Because of this philosophy, a program that is maintained with autoconf
will generally compile and run even on many systems that the developer
didn't specifically anticipate.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Standard build targets (can be run after the Makefile is generated by
configure):

	% make

Builds the program, libraries, and utilities, automatically rerunning
autoconf, autoheader, automake, and/or aclocal if the relevant files
have changed.

	% make clean

Gets rid of all object files, libraries, and programs produced by make.
You may need to do this if you change a header file or something and
the software isn't rebuilding completely (the Makefiles don't have all
the possible dependency rules for header files).

	% make install

Install the software under the installation prefix.

	% make distclean

Restore to the state in which Vis5d is distributed.  Does 'make clean'
and in addition gets rid of the cached configure information,
Makefiles, etcetera.  configure must be re-run after this if you want
to do anything else.

	% make maintainer-clean

Gets rid of even more files than 'make distclean', including some
files that may need special tools to rebuild.  Currently, this doesn't
do much; if you really want to clean the directory, use:

	% make super-clean

Gets rid of *all* the automatically generated files, including the
configure script, the Makefile.in files, etcetera.  You will need to
re-run autogen.sh.  Don't do this unless you have automake, autoconf,
etcetera!

	% make dist

Make the distribution package; results in a file
vis5d-<version>.tar.gz in the current directory.  This is the file
that you should give out to users.  The nice thing about this is that
you don't have to worry about any files you might have lying around
from your development efforts; only those files explicitely specified
in the Makefile.am's will go into the dist.
